# MasterThesis

## Abstract

Vector databases are designed to store unstructured data in semantically meaningful representations. Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) is the primary query method for vector DBs, and the inverted file index (IVF) is among the most popular ANNS techniques. IVF indexes use clustering to dynamically reduce the search space based on the query. A high-quality IVF index minimizes the number of vectors that need to be scanned to reach high recall. The objective we set out to achieve with this thesis was to understand and characterize the effectiveness of different techniques and training procedures used to build performant IVF indexes that can hold billions of vectors. To achieve this, we compared a form of hierarchical clustering (HC) recently applied to building these indexes with more computationally intensive flat clustering (FC) techniques widely implemented in ANNS libraries. We experimented with training with cluster size penalties, with gradient descent, or using different centroid update frequencies. We also tested the importance of replication to avoid boundary issues in IVF indexes. Our results show that HC has competitive performance compared to flat clustering, despite its lower asymptotic complexity, and that it is also beneficial as an initialization procedure to seed flat clustering. Moreover, HC initialization speeds up convergence of flat clustering with k-means, and on some datasets, it improves recall@10 performance at convergence when compared to a clustering initialized with uniformly sampled points from the dataset. Ultimately, using the results of our experiments, we created a comprehensive set of recommendations that helps identify the most appropriate techniques to be applied when building IVF indexes by users with varying computational budgets.
